# Conclusions {#sec-conclusions}

This thesis aimed to address critical gaps in understanding the
multi-scale complexity of integrating wind energy in Mexico. It outlined
specific objectives around three main contributions, each focused on
different temporal and spatial scales. Different regions of Mexico were
studied including those with higher wind resources as the Yucatan
Peninsula and the Gulf of Tehuantepec, also those regions with complex
orography as La Rumorosa and Puebla among others.

The first contribution analyzed the interaction between wind and solar
renewable resources and the electrical demand of the Yucatan Peninsula.
To capture the variability associated with both human activities and
natural phenomena, data spanning several years were required. The
analysis focused on demand patterns at daily, weekly, and monthly
timescales, which are the most relevant for understanding the temporal
dynamics of energy consumption. This approach provides a robust
framework for optimizing renewable energy integration, addressing both
the variability of resources and the temporal dynamics of demand.

The second contribution bridges two temporal scales and sources of
information. The proposed methodology leverages available experimental
data to characterize turbulent fluctuations at high resolution,
enhancing a lower-resolution reanalysis dataset. By identifying areas of
effectiveness, the methodology demonstrates the homogeneity of wind
resources in relation to terrain complexity. The enhancement of the
meteorological model, incorporating variability from experimental
observations, reduces uncertainty in wind energy assessments, resulting
in more accurate resource evaluations.

The final contribution evaluated the feasibility of floating wind
turbine technology under the specific meteorological and oceanic
conditions of the Gulf of Tehuantepec. First, these conditions were
characterized using long-term regional reanalysis data. Then,
high-frequency simulations were conducted to capture real-world
variability, allowing for a detailed analysis of mechanical loads caused
by wind and wave interactions with the turbine.

The frameworks developed in this thesis address key challenges in
diverse applications: integrating renewable sources into regional grids,
improving meteorological models with region-specific physical
characteristics, and assessing emerging technologies such as floating
wind turbines to identify technical challenges for future deployment.

These contributions not only advance academic understanding but also
provide practical tools for policymakers and industry stakeholders,
enabling more informed decision-making and sustainable energy planning.

## Limitations {#limitations .unnumbered}

One of the primary limitations of this research is the reliance on the
ERA5 dataset as a common source of information. While widely used in the
scientific community, ERA5, like any numerical model, has inherent
biases that vary by region. Further advancements in developing more
accurate, corrected, and validated models will generate better results.

Another limitation is the restricted availability of actual wind data in
Mexico. Nationwide measurement campaigns are essential to generate
high-quality information for various applications, particularly for
resource assessment and improving the accuracy of meteorological models,
as mentioned before.

The theoretical assessment of emerging technologies involves several
assumptions. Therefore, the results presented in this study should be
considered as preliminary recommendations for guiding the design and
deployment of new technologies. To validate the identified strengths and
weaknesses, experimental testing of prototype devices in potential
deployment zones should be considered as a first step toward future
integration.

## Future Research {#future-research .unnumbered}

This research opens new questions and opportunities for further
investigation. The continuous evolution of meteorological datasets, such
as the upcoming ECMWF reanalysis ERA6 with higher resolution, along with
advancements in simulation tools like the new version of OpenFAST with
improved solvers, presents an opportunity to refine and extend the
methodologies developed in this study, potentially leading to more
accurate results.

Long-term datasets provide an opportunity to analyze the impact of
climate change on wind resources, which is essential for understanding
the interaction between large-scale natural phenomena, such as
hurricanes and tropical storms, and wind energy technology. Analyzing
resource variability can help guide the development of strategies for
future wind energy planning and deployment.

To enhance the integration of renewable energy sources into the energy
mix, future studies could explore the complementarity between different
energy sources based on regional resource availability and electricity
demand. Additionally, incorporating solutions such as energy storage
could improve grid stability and reliability. Such analyses could also
be extended beyond Mexico to other regions, such as Latin America, where
diverse renewable energy potentials exist.

Offshore wind energy remains an emerging technology in Mexico, with no
concrete deployment plans despite its identified potential. Further
research is needed to refine technical assessments and conduct
specialized studies that evaluate not only turbine performance but also
broader implications, including environmental impact, grid integration,
and interactions with economic activities.

Finally, the automation of the presented frameworks could optimize
analysis by incorporating additional data sources and leveraging
advanced techniques such as machine learning and artificial
intelligence. However, it remains crucial to validate existing
meteorological models to ensure the availability of high-quality data
for training and analysis.
